The Ninth International Conference on Electronic Measurement & Instruments

ICEMI’2009

Design Wireless Multi-sensor Fire Detection and Alarm System Based on ARM

Haibing Hu Gang Wang Qixing Zhang Jinjun Wang Jun Fang Yongming Zhang
(State Key Laboratory of Fire Science China University of Science and Technology, Hefei 230027, China)
E-mail: zhangym@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract- The system uses nRF2401 for short-range wireless

communications, GPRS for long-distance _ wireless
communications, ARM9 for center console, Wireless
Multi-sensor Fire Detector for node, and BP algorithm is used
for judging the probability of fire. Wireless Multi-sensor Fire
Detector is formed of the low-power electrochemical carbon
monoxide sensor, photoelectric smoke detector and
semiconductor temperature sensor. BP algorithm program is
embedded in the S3C2440A ARM. The samples of BP algorithm
were derived from the fire detection standard room of the State
Key Laboratory of Fire Science of China. Center console uses
Em GIS(embedded GIS) to show where the fire break out and
uses GPRS to transmit SMS to the fire command center. The
system is low false alarm rate, low cost, fast response and
convenient to install.

Key words-ARM9; Multi-sensor fire detector; Em GIS;
nRF 2401; GPRS; BP algorithm

I INTRODUCTION

Fire brings great harm to the country's economic and
social stability, detecting the location of a fire timely and
accurately is an effective way to prevent or mitigate lose.
The current fire detection and alarm system use the two
bus for connecting Smoke temperature composite fire
detector and central console. It has anti-interference, high
reliability, etc., It has been widely used in society and
played an important role in Socio-economic, national
security. But it is high cost, design, construction and
maintenance is complex. So people invented the wireless
fire detection and alarm system. Recently, wireless fire
detection and alarm system has been rapid development.
Has Emerge in the wireless temperature, smoke, smoke
temperature composite fire detection and alarm system.
The most influential wireless fire detection and alarm
system is invented by ITI Company in the United States.
The system uses temperature detectors and photoelectric
smoke detectors to for the nodes, the central monitoring
and alarm center is composed of the CS-4000, a
computer and a printer. The communication distance of
the system in open space is 600 meters, the working
frequency is 319.5MHz, the life of temperature detector
is 2 years when using 9V lithium battery for power
supply, the life of photoelectric smoke detector is 6.5
years when using two 3V lithium batteries for power
supply. This technology currently is the world's most
advanced wireless alarm technology. However, the high
cost of such a system is not conducive to universal

978-1-4244-3864-8/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

application in the society and it use single parameter to
judge whether a fire breaks out, which causes high false
alarm rate of fire. To solve these problems, developing a
universal wireless fire detection and alarm system which
has low cost and low false alarm rate is very meaningful.
Therefore, we must R&D a special system like the
Wireless Multi-sensor Fire Detection and Alarm System
Based on ARM. The center console of this system is
made up of the ARM9, GIS software, nRF2401 and
GPRS modules; Wireless Multi-sensor Fire Detector is
formed of low-power microcontroller, three kinds of
sensors and nRF2401 module. The structure diagram of
this system is shown in Fig.1. This paper is organized as
follows. In section 2, hardware design, include design the
hardware of the wireless multi-sensor fire detector and
the center console. In section 3, software design, include
design the software of the wireless multi-sensor fire
detector and the center consol. The conclusion is made in

section 4. _
ss

Center console.

 

Wireless Fire Detector Wireless Fire Detector

EWN EWN EWN

T senso1 Smoke senso1 T senso1 Smoke senso1 T sensor Smoke senso

CO sensor CO senso1 CO sensor

Fig.1 The Structure diagram of Wireless Multi-sensor Fire Detection
and Alarm System Based on ARM

Il HARDWARE DESIGN

The hardware of this system includes wireless
multi-sensor fire detectors and center console. Wireless
multi-sensor fire detector is used for collecting,
processing, sending and receiving data, which consists of
the MSP430 microcontroller, temperature sensor, CO
sensor, smoke detector, signal amplifier and power, etc.;
Center console is used for receiving and sending data,
according to received data, query Em GIS database and
display the location of the fire on the map of the building,
and finally through the sound and light to alarm, at the
same time, use the GPRS module to send SMS to the fire
command center. It consists of ARM9 panel, GPRS
module and alarm etc.

2.1 Design of Wireless Multi-sensor Fire Detector

Wireless multi-sensor fire detector mainly consists of

3-285

Wireless Fire DetectorThe Ninth International Conference on Electronic Measurement & Instruments

MCU, 4-way analog switches, temperature sensor, CO
sensor, smoke detector and wireless communication
modules (Fig.2). MCU use — ultralow-power
microcontroller MSP430F149, which is the industry's
ultralow-power MCU, low supply-voltage range: +1.8 V
~ +3.6 V, The current consumption of real-time clock 1s
only 0.1uA in standby mode and 280uA (1MHz) in
active mode, from the sleep to wake up to the normal
work only takes 6us, it also has 8-channel 12-bit A / D,
16 =< 16-bit hardware multiplier. The 4-way analog
switch use MAX4678, it can be a single power supply
(+2.7 V ~+11 V), temperature sensor use MA X6608, it
is a low-power and analog output temperature sensor,
operating voltage can be as low as 1.8V, operating
current: 15uA, the accuracy: +0.7°C. Smoke Detector is
composed of an infrared light emitting diode and an
infrared light receiver diode. CO sensor use 4CO-500,
the sensitivity: 0.07 + 0.015mA/ppm, the resolution:
I ppm, it has a high linearity and good stability and so on.
Power is monitored by MCU's built-in A / D Acquisition.
RS232 interface chip use SP3220, it is a low-power
RS232 driver chips, the supply voltage: +3.3 V ~ +5 V,
low-power current consumption: IuA, in low-power
state, it can still transmit data. Wireless data transmission
module use low-power nRF2401 module, the module
power supply voltage: 1.9 - 3.6V, in the standby mode
only 1A, emission current is 12.3mA, receive current is
11.3mA. And each chip can be set 40-bit address through
software, the built-in CRC error correction, error
detection circuit and hardware and agreement, the
development of software is very easily. Using the 3.7V,
2000mAH lithium battery as power supply, in order to
extend the service life, when MSP430F 149 set in LPM3
mode, in this mode, work current is about 16uA, the
service life is about 5 years. Monitoring power supply is
necessary in order to facilitate the maintenance of the
power, the results will be transmit through a wireless
network to center console, if the power supply voltage is
too low ,the alarm will in time inform the management
staff to replace the battery. Its structure is shown in Fig.

2.
sa MSP430F149
eee _—
Temperature Smoke sensor CO sensor
sensor

Fig.2 The Structure diagram of Wireless Complex Fire Detectior

 
 

   
 

   
  

2.2 Design of Center Console

The Center console is used for receiving and
transmitting data, according to received data, inquiry the
GIS database and show location of the fire in the map of
the building, at the same time, alarm through the sound,

3-286

ICEMI’2009

light and GPRS module. It consists of ARM9 board,
GPRS module, nRF2401 module and alarm, etc., It is

shown in Fig.3.

   
   

GPRS module

Fig.3 the Structure Diagram of Center Console

2.2.1 ARM9 board

ARM9 board consists of Samsung’s S3C2440A, 3.5
inch TFT, 64M SDRAM, 64M Nand Flash, 2M Nor
Flash and four interfaces, etc, It 1s shown in Fig.4.
S3C2440A is a cost-effective, low-power
microcontroller solution in a small form factor. 3.5 inch
TFT is LCD touch screen, is used for display the location
of the fire. Nor Flash memory is used for BIOS; Nand
Flash is used for installing the operating system

WinCES.0.
U

 
   
   
 

   

 

Alarm Interface
GPRS Interface
nRF2401 Interface

  
 
 

S3C2440A

      

SD Card Interface

Fig.4 the Structure Diagram of ARM9 Board
2.2.2 GPRS module

General packet radio service (GPRS) is a packet
switching technology for GSM _ networks. It's an
advanced data transmission mode that does not require a
continuous connection to the Internet, as with a standard
home modem. Instead, GPRS uses the network only
when there is data to be sent, which is more efficient. The
&GSM Association& believes using GPRS will enable
users to send and receive data at speeds up to 117 kbps,
more than two times faster than with traditional home
modems.

In this design, Siemens MC55 embedded module is
used for GPRS module, it supports GPRS & GSM
network modes, The hardware interface uses standard
RS232 serial port, through which transmits AT
commands to the GPRS module, you can control the
GPRS module easily.

2.2.3 NRF 2401 module

nRF2401A is the Industry's smallest, lowest cost,The Ninth International Conference on Electronic Measurement & Instruments

lowest current consumption and low voltage supply
2.4GHz RF transceiver. It provides global wireless
equipment vendors with global 2.4GHz transceiver
technology at the price and complexity of lower
frequencies. The nRF2401A is a highly integrated
component for wireless communication manufactured in
an ultra modern 0.18um CMOS process. The entire
transceiver including all inductors and filters is
integrated in a single chip that gives the lowest cost
solution to the end user. The only external components
needed to make a complete RF system are a crystal and a
resistor.

In this design, wireless data transmission module use
low-power nRF2401 module, the module power supply
voltage: 1.9 - 3.6V, in the standby mode only 1pA,
emission current is 12.3mA, receive current is 11.3mA.
And each chip can be set 40-bit address through software,
the built-in CRC error correction, error detection circuit
and hardware and agreement, the development of
software is very easily.

IH] SOFTWARE DESIGN

Software design, include wireless multi-sensor fire
detector program design and center console software
design. Wireless multi-sensor fire detector software is
mainly responsible for collecting, processing,
transmitting and receiving signals. Center console
software design, including transplantation of the
embedded system, Em GIS software, the

GPRS

serial

communication program, communication

program and alarm program.

3.1 Wireless Multi-sensor Fire Detector Program Design

Wireless multi-sensor fire detector acquires power
density, CO density and
temperature signals, then uses artificial neural network

supply voltage, smoke
algorithm (BP algorithm) to judge whether a fire breaks
out. If there is a alarm signal, then transmit data to the
center console. The detector also receives voltage
detection signal, when receives a voltage detection signal,
then acquires the voltage and transmit it. The flow-chart
shown in Fig.5.

3.2 Center Console Software Design

As shown in Fig.6, the wireless transmission program
will receive the fire alarm signal and transmit it to the
center console through the serial program; center console
uses Em GIS software to show the location of the fire
broke out, at the same time, open the alarm and the
indicator light begin to flash. The center console control
GPRS module through the serial port to transmit alarm
SMS. In Fig.6, the dotted line is stand for the process of

ICEMI’2009

receiving alarm signal, Solid line is stand for the process

of transmitting alarm signal.

 
        
    

(Voltage of the power

System Start
System Initiate

  

LED flash

Data acquisition
(Temperature
Smoke density

Data acquisition co density)

supply)

Fig.5 Flow-Chart of Wireless Multi-sensor Fire Detector software

  
   

GPRS Control Code

design

Wireless alarm == Alarm code ---4
'
'

GPRS Module

Fig.6 Flow-Chart of Center Console Software

The process of center console software design, as

follows:
A.

Installed Windows CE5S.0 as operating system.
Windows CE5.0 is a simple, efficient and
multi-tasking operating system, which can be
cut. It has its own system structure with
independent development of the kernel and
device driver model. It has the key part of
Windows NT and Windows9X and supports
more than 1400 most frequently used Win32
API, using EVC (Embedded Visual C + +4.0),
embedded software applications can _ be
developed rapidly. The process of installing
Windows CE5.0 as follows: (1) Division;
(2)Install boot loader; (3)Install Eboot;
(4)Install the kernel image of Windows CE5S.0;
Using EVC (Microsoft Embedded Visual C +
+4.0) develop Em GIS software. Through Em
GIS software, compare the signals that store in
ARM9 board with the signals that the wireless
module receives, shows the alarm type and the
location of the fire broke out in the map; Em
GIS software requires concise code, high
reliability, small space storage; In order to
improve system run speed, we have to store

3-287ICEMI’2009

The Ninth International Conference on Electronic Measurement & Instruments

map data in a SD card;

C. Compiling serial communication program.
ARM9 through the serial port to transmit AT
commands to GPRS module to transmit alarm
SMS, however, there is no MSComm control
in Windows CE5.0, so have to use Win32 API
function to realize serial communication by
writing class Cserial, open the serial port
function: OpenPort (LPCTSTR Port , int
Baudrate, int DataBits, int StopBits, int Parity,
LPDataArriveProc proc = NULL, DWORD
userdata = 0), ReadPort (char * data, int length)
as a function of reading serial, WritePort (char
* data, int length) as a function of writing serial;
this function can be used to write AT
commands to serial port and operate GPRS
module;

D. Compiling GPRS module control procedures.
Making fire alarm’ signals and _ the
corresponding location signal to embedded in a
text message and transmits it to the fire
department or management personnel, Writing
Class CGPRSer to control GPRS module, AT +
CMSS command is stand for transmit SMS
from the memory, gprsSendMessage (CString
strNum , CString strCon) as a function of
transmitting SMS;

E. Compiling alarm control procedures. Alarm
control procedures is used for controlling
alarm light and alarm, we have specially
compile alarm drivers and the alarm control
category, the function Led (Bool status) to
control lights OFF, the function Alarm (Bool
status) to control alarm opening and closing.

IV CONCLUSION

This system use ARM9 board for the center console,
use nRF2401 module for wireless communication, use
GPRS module for remote alarm. Develop Em GIS
software for this System specifically, which not only can
shows the location of the fire broke out, but also can
control the GPRS remote alarm module. Compared with
traditional fire detection alarm system, the system saves a
lot cost of hardware and improves the efficiency of the
fire detection alarm. It not only can make up for the
limitations of wired fire detection system, when use in
ancient buildings, temples, museums, etc., but also in
family homes, villas, etc., the system will has wide
applicable market and prospects.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The study was conducted under the Project
08010302203 supported by S&T research project of
Anhui Province. The authors would like to thank Mr.
Shixing Liu and Mr. Jianxiong Zhu for their helps during
the design.

3-288

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[11]

REFERENCES

Wu _ Longbiao,Fang Jun,Xie Qiyuan. Fire detection and
information processing[M]. Beijing: Chemical Industry Press,
2006, 264-265(in Chinese)

Chen nan. Design of Fire Detection and Control Systems for
Intelligent Buildings[M]. Beijing: Tsinghua University Press,
2001, 7: 19-60(in Chinese)

Guo Jinbing,Guo Qiao,Cheng Xuewen. Research on Electro- map
for PDA [J]. Computer&Digital Engineering. 2005, 33(7):
21-23(in Chinese)

Liu Xin, Chen Feng, Li Jin. Implementing Serial Communication
in Windows CE [J]. Applications of the Computer Systems. 2003,
2: 70-73(in Chinese)

Liu Baifen,Zhang Yongxian,Gan Fangcheng,Wang Donghai.
Design Intelligent Multi-sensor Fire Monitoring Based on DSP
[C].The Eighth International Conference on _ Electronic
Measurement and Instruments, Sian, China, 2007,(4): 799-804.
Liu Xin, Chen Feng, Li Jin. Implementing Serial Communication
in Windows CE [J]. Applications of the Computer Systems. 2003,
2: 70-73(in Chinese)

Tong Xiaohui,Gu Zenghui,Liu Jingao. The Design of SMS on
PDA and Wireless Module[J]. Journal of East China Normal
University(Nature Science). 2004, 4: 52-55(in Chinese)

Zhu Xiaowu. Mobile GIS Development Based on WindowsCE{J].
Applications of the Computer Systems .2002, 9: 9-12(in Chinese)
Ding Yonghong ,Sun Yungiang. Design of wireless data transfer
system based on nRF2401 [J]. Foreign Electronic Measurement
Technology. 2008, 27(4): 45-47(in Chinese)

Liu Shi-xing, Gu Qin-dong , Zhang Yong-ming, Qi Ning.
Research on wireless fire monitoring network for historical
buildings [J]. Fire Science and Technology. 2008, 27(4):
258-261(in Chinese)

Geng Xin-min, Sun Jin-zhong. Design of Wireless
Communication System Based on ARM and GPRS{J].
Instrumentation Technology. 2009, 1: 44-45,58(in Chinese)